---
layout: meetup
title:  "Introduction"
date:   2016-09-22
type: meetup
meetup: 
---

For my first post, I'm going to start out by describing my development environment and how I got to a setup I like.
I've followed many tutorials and gone down a few blind alleys, so if you're interested in following my work, if follows that we might save some time by getting the fundamentals setup out of the way. I hope this will This will save time and frustration for everyone involved down the line, or at least provide some amusement along the way.

First for the general editing tools. I use the *Bash* shell for running code, version control and networking.
I use Bash, as opposed to other available *nix-based shells (Zsh, etc.) mostly because it is standard and available in most Unix & Linux environments. At first this may seem like a default position but I've come to philosophical perspective that for every default overridden, there is an associated maintenance cost, not to mention sometimes an additional learning curve--but more on this later.

I use *Sublime Text* for editing files and managing projects. I like Sublime mostly because it gets out of the way and lets me concentrate on the task at hand. The ecosystem is rich with plugins and options but I probably use a smaller subset of these than average.
One of the features I rely on most is the "Vintage" mode, where I can use *vim* navigation commands.
This is a simple feature but a powerful one for (at least) two reasons; first, I don't need to use the mouse--granted this is not unique to either vim or Sublime Text but it is fundamental to my workflow--second, it keeps me in practice with my vim keyboard navigation commands. Vim may seem like an antiquated technology to some, even while taking the form of [identity politics](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Identity_politics) with others, but it's real value to me is in it's ubiquity. If you log into a server, it's [extremely likely](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Usage_share_of_operating_systems#Public_servers_on_the_Internet) that you will have vim at your disposal (and Bash for that matter).

Now for the language specific tools. My default language is Python. I chose Python for (at least) three reasons; first, it's--you guessed it--relatively ubiquitous, second, it's enthusiastically *recommended* in a wide range of development domains by a large number of users, including all the major domains in which I intend to work. Those being:
- Data analysis
- Scientific modeling & simulation
- Web development
- System administration & automation
