---
layout: meetup
title:  "How I Learned to Stop Worrying and Love to Code"
date:   2017-06-23
type: meetup
meetup: 
---

I've loved technology for as long as I can remember. Throughout my life I've moved from one fascinated obsession to another. From Legos to the original Nintendo and later the Commodore 64 my mother bought us kids, teaching myself to type on the keyboard with Carmen Sandiego, Trying to install Yellow Dog Linux on my original iMac (Orange, if I remember right), to motorcycles (1970's Honda CB360) and European cars (1980's Saab turbo), HAM radio in college and bicycles.

Despite my lifelong love-affair with technology, including an engineering degree, I didn't learn to code until my mid-thirties. I honestly found it tedious and frustrating, largely because I didn't really have any mentors, except a few friends in college who were into gaming or file-sharing (sans license).

While, I knew how important & amazing computers were the ability to code a full program eluded me. Once I started working in my field, energy efficiency, I simply didn't have enough time. Once I struck out as on my own as an independent consultant and shortly thereafter working for a startup company with a web-based product, where I had the freedom and time (not always paid ;-) to explore the wild world of software development and techniques.

Originally my intention was simply to replace my old tooling, largely based around Microsoft Excel and US Department of Energy (US DOE) software, with a data analysis and scripting language. I chose Python around 2012 and have never had a single regret. I've also dabbled with R from time to time and find that it fills a solid niche in my work as well but I'm especially glad that I chose to invest in the Python / Numpy / Pandas ecosystem. More recently I've made a push into web-development, motivated simply by the earnest wish to share my work and make it available for others, with the Flask web-framework.

Now, in the white-hot center of transitioning (maybe better described as a pivot, as I hope remain in my original domain of clean energy my career to software development & data-science), I am now fully committed to becoming a full-stack developer and data-scientist because I want to change the world _and_ make money.

This seems like the hardest problem to solve and I will need the sharpest tools to do it. I've always been a avid learner--my thirst for knowledge is probably my greatest asset and I've always subscribed to the saying that, ["It's a poor craftsman that blames his [or her] tools"](https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=2380679). I've had the foresight to select some solid tools, including Python & R, and I want to hone the craft of using them. That's why I want to attend and / or mentor at a code school.

I was instantly attracted to Holberton school for several reasons. First the mission of diversity and community service speaks deeply to me, especially in these challenging political times and the regional disparities that we all know are unsustainable. I hope that I can become the change I want to see in the world and that my involvement with will leverage the network effects of what seems to be an ideal community for achieving it.
